Hi there.
This is the model room.
So we are not done with the chapter.
And I would believe that it's a pretty solid coverage of the core object oriented design concepts.
And these are some of the object oriented features which we discussed.
I think the most important thing we did was that to understand the why part, the part where most engineers
get confused is when to use an abstract class versus when to use an interface.
There is always some fuzziness around these concepts.
I think we addressed this quite effectively by using our case study as a background.
Additionally, we also looked at how interfaces can be classified into mixed sense and representative
interfaces, and I think that's pretty important as most books are.
Courses generally do not discuss in the way we have done it.
Finally, we also discussed the motivation behind introducing default on static methods and interfaces
in Java eight.
So the motivation part is very important and we looked at them by using some realistic scenarios as
examples so that we could feel the need for those features.
So I think overall we have set a solid foundation and if you are still not feeling comfortable, then
I would suggest reviewing the lectures once again, since this is more to do with the design.
It is normal that it would require more effort for these concepts to really sink in.
It might require a little bit of experience to to be really comfortable with these concepts.
So now let's go ahead and do a quick recap of the important stuff which we have learned in this chapter.
We began this chapter by introducing a new object oriented feature called Abstract Classes, which can
have abstract methods.
The term abstract speaks for itself.
That is, there is something abstract about the class.
It is not concrete.
Basically, abstract implies that the classes abstract enough or generic enough that at least one of
its methods cannot have an implementation.
That is, implementation must be provided by subclasses.
Such a method without an implementation is called as an abstract method.
So since their abstract are not concrete, abstract classes are not intangible.
It just doesn't make sense to instantiate them and invoke an abstract method which simply doesn't have
any implementation.
But nice thing is abstract classes also define a contract or common protocol, which is useful in defining
the core behavior of its subclasses and also in providing the advantage of polymorphism.
This is important.
Not that abstract classes can also include state which subclasses can inherit.
And all this came up due to this new requirement.
We wanted to extend relief for kids.
That is, we wanted to tag certain bookmarks as kid friendly and they would show up under a new kid's
tab.
Here that is kid friendly eligible method is abstract as bookmark class is too abstract to provide any
implementation for it and so subclasses would override it.
And with regards to specifics, we know that both abstract classes and abstract methods must have abstract
modifier in their declaration.
An abstract class can have both abstract and concrete methods.
And here are some specifics with regards to only abstract methods.
Abstract methods have no body, and they end with a semicolon and they must be overridden.
And this also means that abstract methods cannot be static.
That's because static methods cannot be overridden.
And if there is even one abstract method, then the class must be an abstract class.
Finally, if the subclass of an abstract class is also abstract, then it need not implement any unimplemented
abstract methods.
They can be implemented by one or more concrete subclasses of this abstract subclass.
Next, we look at another very important object oriented feature called Interfaces, and we used our
case study to introduce interfaces.
We had a new requirement to share kid friendly bookmarks with a partner website, and we wanted to do
this only for books and web links, but not movies.
So the requirement was that we wanted this sharing related functionality only in book and weblink classes,
but not in movie class.
Moreover, we wanted a common protocol in place, and we initially played with the idea of book and
web link classes extending a new super class called Shareable.
But we soon had to abandon this idea as book and web link were already extending bookmark class.
And we know that Java does not support multiple inheritance.
So the solution was to use interfaces as shown here.
So at least from our case study, it may appear that the fact that multiple inheritance is not possible
in Java is what was forcing us to use interfaces.
And that is wrong.
It was simply used as a reason to introduce interfaces.
The key is that interfaces are appropriate for certain things.
Some interfaces are appropriate to allow a class to define additional capability.
In our case, that additional capability was the ability to share bookmarks.
Such interfaces are loosely referred to as mixes.
So even if there was no bookmark class, you must implement shareable as an interface rather than as
a class.
Apart from makes sense.
Interface can also define the core functionality of its subclasses.
We refer to such an interface as a representative interface.
Just note that representative interface is not an official term.
It was just introduced in this course.
It was just something I came up with based on how they are being used.
We also looked at a third kind of interface called Marker Interface, which is simply an interface with
no methods by implementing such an interface, a class specifying that it has certain properties.
And one example we briefly discussed was about realizable interface.
By implementing realizable, a class is announcing that it has realizable property.
That is, it is announcing that it is giving permission for its objects to be serialized.
So if a class does not implement realizable, then it means that its objects cannot be serialized.
Coming to specifics.
The modifier interface must be used in interface declaration.
A subclass.
Implementing an interface would use the keyword implements while a sub interface extending an interface
would use the keyword extents and note that a class can implement multiple interfaces and similarly
an interface can extend multiple interfaces to.
Like an abstract class.
An interface is not interchangeable too, so it can only be used as a reference type and not object
type.
Basically, interfaces are stateless.
Not that like classes interfaces can have only public or default access levels.
Keep that in mind.
And here are all the members that an interface can have.
Interface is primarily an abstract specification, and so mostly you will see only abstract methods
and interfaces.
And interfaces can also have static final variables.
From Java eight onwards, interfaces can have default and static methods.
And finally, interfaces can also include nested types which can be nested classes or nested interfaces.
I know that all these members that we are seeing here are public by default.
They cannot have private or protected access levels.
They can have default access level only if the interface itself has default access level.
Right.
And as a matter of style, it is recommended not to explicitly specify the default modifier.
And here are the benefits of default methods which can be part of interfaces from Java eight onwards.
The main reason for introducing default methods was interface evolution.
That is, there can be added to an interface without breaking the code that is implementing the interface.
It is not required to even recompile the implementing code and clients of the implementing code can
invoke the newly added default methods.
It's not just about interface evolution.
Default methods can also be added right when the interface is designed for the very first time.
And in that sense, it's an interface method with the default implementation and the subclass can provide
a more specific implementation.
Or it can simply use the default implementation.
Default methods can be used instead of providing those methods in a separate companion class.
Right.
We looked at the collections class in the Java package and we also saw how the source method can be
moved into the interface list.
Finally, default methods allow functional interfaces to stay as functional interfaces.
Functional interfaces are those interfaces that have only one single abstract method, and we looked
at functional interfaces and also a lambda expression, and we said that a lambda expression can be
passed as an argument to a method which has a functional interface as the method parameter.
Otherwise we would get a compilation error.
Finally we saw that interfaces can also define static methods from Java eight onwards.
The main benefit of static methods is that they are also useful in eliminating companion classes, so
they share one of the benefits of default methods.
However, static methods are good candidates to replace factory methods which are responsible for creating
objects.
Default methods, on the other hand, are good candidates to replace methods which manipulate input
objects and usually mutate their state like the sought method and collections class.
Finally, here are some effective Java items which we discussed in this chapter.
First one recommends to prefer interfaces over abstract classes, and this makes even more sense with
Java eight onwards as interfaces can also have concrete methods now.
So interface evolution is no longer an issue.
Before Java eight, if the developer felt that interface might evolve, then he or she would consider
using abstract classes.
But upstart classes are still needed when we need to define representative behavior of subclasses but
with state involved.
Right.
And let's also remember that abstract classes are used for providing skeletal implementations of interfaces.
Second item says whenever possible, try to use an interface as a reference type in all kinds of variable
declarations and also use them as method return types.
That's an important item and also an easy one to follow.
Third one says that we need to use class hierarchies like the way we did in our case study instead of
using it to class.
And that would lead to much cleaner design, cleaner code and also flexible code.
So that's about it.
And that's the end of part two of the course.
And as mentioned earlier, it is a pretty solid coverage of the core object oriented design concepts,
especially as we took time to understand the concepts from a conceptual standpoint.
And we are now left with implementing the project where we will put pretty much everything we have learned
into practice.
We cannot say that we pretty much completed all the fundamental concepts which were include both language
basic series in part one as well as the object oriented concepts from part two.
Next, we will look at how we can use Eclipse IDE and then we will get started with the project.
So thanks for listening and I will see you in the next chapter.
And until then, happy coding.